Summary	Female BRCA1 mutation carriers have a nearly 80% probability of developing breast cancer during their life-time. We hypothesized that the breast epithelium at risk in BRCA1 mutation carriers harbors mammary epithelial cells (MECs) with altered proliferation and differentiation properties.
Microarray studies revealed that PMEC colonies from BRCA1 mutation carriers anticipate expression profiles found in BRCA1-related tumors, and that the EGFR pathway is upregulated in BRCA1 mutation carriers compared ton non BRCA1 mutation carriers.
Summary	Background: The BRCA1 protein has been shown to play critical roles in several molecular pathways, but the specific defect(s) that promote breast and ovarian carcinogenesis remain a mystery. Furthermore, while mutations that result in a truncated protein can unequivocally be called disease-causing, many other variants mutations have poorly defined clinical significance. Given these factors, development of a functional assay for BRCA1 is a significant clinical priority, but presents significant biological challenges. Methodology and Significant Findings: We have developed a novel function-based assay for BRCA1 carrier identification by examining the effect of loss of a single copy of BRCA1 on global gene expression levels. Comparison of the gene expression profiles of undamaged, actively cycling EBV-transformed lymphocytes allowed accurate discrimination between BRCA1+/+ and BRCA1+/- cells. The best predictor was 100% (16/16) accurate in predicting BRCA1 status in an independent test set; the overall sensitivity and specificity of the test are 84% and 92%, respectively, when the training set data (53 samples) is also included. A set of 22 genes was identified by two distinct analytical approaches, including a set of 11 genes (TBX21, MX2, IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3, GLDC, F13A1, SOX4, LCK, HERC5, USP18) that could be linked in a single pathway encompassing cellular proliferation and development. By contrast, analysis of the same samples for global gene expression level changes following irradiation did not support the development of an accurate class predictor. Conclusions and Significance: Our results support the idea that the fundamental defect resulting from BRCA1 mutation is a reduction in cellular differentiation, and that changes in the DNA damage response require inactivation of the second BRCA1 allele. Given that the class predictor we have developed was based on unperturbed cells, this work could ultimately lead to the development of a rapid and accurate test for identification of BRCA1 mutation carriers.Summary	Approximately 5% of all breast cancers can be attributed to an inherited mutation in one of two cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2. We searched for genes that have the potential to distinguish healthy BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers from non-carriers based on differences in expression profiling. Using expression microarrays we compared gene expression of irradiated lymphocytes from BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers versus control non-carriers. We identified 137 probe sets in BRCA1 carriers and 1345 in BRCA2 carriers with differential gene expression. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that most of these genes relate to regulation pathways of DNA repair processes, cell cycle regulation and apoptosis. Real-time PCR was performed on the 36 genes which were most prominently differentially expressed in the microarray assay; 21 genes were shown to be significantly differentially expressed in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers as compared to controls (p<0.05). Based on a validation study with 40 mutation carriers and 17 non-carriers, a multiplex model that included six or more coincidental genes of 18 selected genes was constructed in order to predict the risk of carrying a mutation. The results using this model showed sensitivity 95% and specificity 88%. In summary, our study provides insight into the biological effect of heterozygous mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in response to ionizing irradiation induced DNA damage. We also suggest a set of 18 genes that can be used as a prediction and screening tool for BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutational carriers by using easily obtained lymphocytes.
Using expression microarrays we compared gene expression of irradiated lymphocytes from BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers versus control non-carriers
Summary	Gene transcription effects of mutations in the infuenza virus A/Hong Kong/1/1968(H3N2) nonstructural 1 NS1 gene in infected human A549 (lung epithilium) cells
Influenza A/Hong Kong/156/1997(H5N1) virus NS1 gene mutations F103L and M106I both increase IFN antagonism, virulence and cytoplasmic localization but differ in binding to RIG-I and CPSF30 (manuscript submitted to Virology Journal). Human cells were infected with influenza viruses mutants with specific gain of function mutations in the NS1 gene in order to assess the affects of each mutation on host gene expression. Human (A549) and mouse (M1) cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection of 2 (infectious viruses/cell) and incubated for 8 hr before collection of total RNA and microarray anlaysis using the Affymetrix platforms. Samples were compared in triplicate to mock PBS infected (uninfected) cells to detecte dysregulated genes for A/HK/1/1968(H3N2) wt, and the following NS1 gene mutants: F103L, M106I, M106V, and F103L + M106I.
Background: The genetic basis for avian to mammalian host switching in influenza A virus is largely unknown. The human A/HK/156/1997(H5N1) virus that transmitted from poultry possesses NS1 gene mutations F103L + M106I that are virulence determinants in the mouse model of pneumonia; however their individual roles have not been determined. The emergent A/Shanghai/1/2013(H7N9)-like viruses also possess these mutations which may contribute to their virulence and ability to switch species.
Methods: NS1 mutant viruses were constructed by reverse genetics and site directed mutagenesis on human and mouse-adapted backbones. Mouse infections assessed virulence, virus yield, tissue infection, and IFN induction. NS1 protein proprieties were assessed for subcellular distribution, IFN antagonism (mouse and human), CPSF30 and RIG-I domain binding, effect on host gene transcription (microarray); and the natural prevalence of 103L and 106I mutants was assessed.
Results: Each of the F103L and M106I mutations contributes additively to virulence to reduce the lethal dose by >800 and >3,200 fold respectively by mediating alveolar tissue infection with >100 fold increased infectious yields. The 106I NS1 mutant lost CPSF binding but the 103L mutant maintained binding that correlated with an increased general decrease in host gene expression in human but not mouse cells. Each mutation positively modulated the inhibition of IFN induction in mouse cells and activation of the IFN-β promoter in human cells but not in combination in human cells indicating negative epistasis. Each of the F103L and M106I mutations restored a defect in cytoplasmic localization of H5N1 NS1 in mouse cells. Human H1N1 and H3N2 NS1 proteins bound to the CARD, helicase and RD RIG-I domains, whereas the H5N1 NS1 with the same consensus 103F and 106M mutations did not bind these domains, which was partially or totally restored by the F103L or M106I mutations respectively.
Conclusions: The F103L and M106I mutations in the H5N1 NS1 protein each increased IFN antagonism and mediated interstitial pneumonia in mice that was associated with increased cytoplasmic localization and altered host factor binding. These mutations may contribute to the ability of previous HPAI H5N1 and recent LPAI H7N9 viruses to switch hosts and cause severe disease in mammals.
Summary	We defined the major transcriptional responses in primary human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) after either infection with influenza or treatment with relevant ligands. We used four different strategies, each highlighting distinct aspects of the response. (1) cells were infected with the wild-type PR8 influenza virus that can mount a complete replicative cycle. (2) cells were transfected with viral RNA (‘vRNA’) isolated from influenza particles. This does not result in the production of viral proteins or particles and identifies the effect of RNA-sensing pathways (e.g., RIG-I.). (3) Cells were treated with interferon beta (IFNb), to distinguish the portion of the response which is mediated through Type I IFNs. (4) Cells were infected with a PR8 virus lacking the NS1 gene (‘DNS1’). The NS1 protein normally inhibits vRNA- or IFNb-induced pathways, and its deletion can reveal an expanded response to infection.Summary	Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) identified the MEIS1 locus for Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS), but causal single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and the functional relevance have remained to be elucidated. The MEIS1 locus contains an exceptionally large number of highly conserved non-coding regions (HCNRs), which potentially function as cis-regulatory modules. We analyzed the HCNRs in the RLS-associated linkage disequilibrium (LD) block for allele-dependent enhancer activity in both zebrafish and mouse, comparing the protective and risk alleles of RLS-associated common variants. We found one enhancer, harboring the lead SNP rs12469063, which showed an allele-dependent reduction of reporter gene expression exclusively in the embryonic ganglionic eminences at developmental stage E12.5. Notably, the reporter activity overlapped with the endogenous telencephalic Meis1 expression domain, which co-localized with transcripts of all four validated RLS loci. Thus, the developing telencephalon represents the first neuroanatomic region implicated for RLS based on GWAS findings.
 	
Summary	Gene expression was measured using microarrays in 8 hour postfertilization embryos, comparing control versus ethanol-treated (2 to 8 hours postfertilization) embryos. This experiment was performed to determine the gene expression changes that occur in response to ethanol treatment as a model of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder.
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) occurs when pregnant mothers consume alcohol, causing embryonic ethanol exposure and characteristic birth defects that include craniofacial, neural and cardiac defects. Gastrulation is a particularly sensitive developmental stage for teratogen exposure, and zebrafish is an outstanding model to study gastrulation and FASD. Epiboly (spreading blastomere cells over the yolk cell), prechordal plate migration and convergence/extension cell movements are sensitive to early ethanol exposure. Here, experiments are presented to characterize mechanisms of ethanol toxicity on epiboly and gastrulation. Epiboly mechanisms include blastomere radial intercalation cell movements and yolk cell microtubule cytoskeleton pulling the embryo to the vegetal pole. Both of these processes were disrupted by ethanol exposure. Ethanol effects on cell migration also indicated that cell adhesion was affected, which was confirmed by cell aggregation assays. E-cadherin cell adhesion molecule expression and distribution, which control epiboly and gastrulation, were not affected. Gene expression microarray analysis was used to identify potential causative factors for early development defects, and expression of the cell adhesion molecule protocadherin-18a (pcdh18a), which controls epiboly, was significantly reduced in ethanol-exposed embryos. Injecting pcdh18a synthetic mRNA in ethanol-treated embryos partially rescued epiboly cell movements, including enveloping layer cell shape changes. Together, data show that epiboly and gastrulation defects induced by ethanol are multifactorial, and include yolk cell (extraembryonic tissue) microtubule cytoskeleton disruption and blastomere adhesion defects, in part caused by reduced pcdh18a expression.Summary	The aim of the study was to investigate how short-term fasting affects whole-body energy homeostasis and skeletal muscle energy/nutrient-sensing pathways and transcriptome in humans. For this purpose, twelve young healthy men were studied during a 24-hour fast. Skeletal muscle biopsies were collected and analyzed at baseline and after 4, 10 and 24h of fasting. As expected, fasting induced a time-dependent decrease in plasma insulin and leptin levels, whereas levels of ketone bodies and free fatty acids increased. This was associated with a metabolic shift from glucose towards lipid oxidation. Transcriptome profiling identified genes that were significantly regulated by fasting in skeletal muscle at both early and late time-points. Collectively, our study provides a comprehensive map of the main energy/nutrient-sensing pathways and transcriptomic changes during short-term adaptation to fasting in human skeletal muscle

Summary	The t(12;21) translocation is the most common genetic rearrangement in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and gives rise to the TEL-AML1 fusion gene, which functions as a transcription factor.
TEL-AML1 expression in EML1 cells results in an impairment of differentiation along the B-lymphoid lineage.
Summary	A causal role of mutations in genes encoding for multiple general transcription factors in neurodevelopmental disorders including autism suggested that alterations at the global level of gene expression regulation might also relate to disease risk in sporadic cases of autism. This premise can be tested by evaluating for global changes in the overall distribution of gene expression levels. For instance, in mice, we recently showed that variability in hippocampal-dependent behaviors was associated with variability in the pattern of the overall distribution of gene expression levels, as assessed by variance in the distribution of gene expression levels in the hippocampus. We hypothesized that a similar change in the variance in gene expression levels might be found in children with autism. Gene expression microarrays covering greater than 47,000 unique RNA transcripts were done on purified RNA from peripheral blood lymphocytes of children with autism (n=82) and controls (n=64). The variance in the distribution of gene expression levels from each microarray was compared between groups of children. Also tested was whether a risk factor for autism, increased paternal age, was associated with variance in the overall distribution of gene expression levels. A decrease in the variance in the distribution of gene expression levels in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) was associated with the diagnosis of autism and a risk factor for autism, increased paternal age. Traditional approaches to microarray analysis of gene expression suggested a possible mechanism for decreased variance in gene expression. Gene expression pathways involved in transcriptional regulation were down-regulated in the blood of children with autism and children of older fathers. Thus, results from global and gene specific approaches to studying microarray data were complimentary and supported the hypothesis that alterations at the global level of gene expression regulation are related to autism and increased paternal age. Regulation of transcription, thus, represents a possible point of convergence for multiple etiologies of autism and other neurodevelopmental disorders.
